Release/4.0.0 (#6603)
open-formulieren/open-forms: CHANGELOG.rst

        `latest <https://open-forms.readthedocs.io/en/latest/changelog.html>`_ docs
        version.

4.0.0 "Jongerius" (2026-08-31)
==============================

Open Forms 4.0.0 is a feature release with breaking changes.

.. epigraph::

>    The recent Open Formulieren community event took place Villa Jongerius in Utrecht. With this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The recent Open Formulieren community event took place at Villa Jongerius in Utrecht. With this
```

   release we want to emphasise on the contribution of the municipality Utrecht and our community

>    members which made Open Formulieren 4.0 possible.

Reviewer 2: Jan Jongerius was a a Dutch entrepeneur, who had garages in mutliple Dutch cities and became the largest Ford dealer in the Netherlands. Villa Jongerius was constructed in Utrecht close to the factory buildings - which eventually became the location for the very first Open Formulieren community event. The release name is a nod to the municipality of Utrecht, who is one of the contributors to this particular release.

This contains the changes from the alpha and beta releases and fixes applied until the stable
version. BEFORE upgrading to 4.0.0, please read the release notes carefully and review the
following instructions.

Upgrade procedure
-----------------

To upgrade to 4.0, please:

> * ⚠️ Ensure you are currently on Open Forms 3.5.4 or newer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ⚠️ Ensure you are currently on Open Forms 3.5.5 or newer.
```

3.5.5 has an additional bit of migration tooling. Let's also enforce that in the settings.

* ⚠️ Review the :ref:`detailed release notes <installation_upgrade_400>` in the
  documentation under **Installation** > **Upgrade details to Open Forms 4.0.0** and
  prepare accordingly.

> * ⚠️ Ensure all forms are converted to use the new logic evaluation.

Reviewer 2: I'd add another entry:

```rst
* ⚠️ Ensure your existing forms still work with the updated clear-on-hide behaviour.
```

* ⚠️ Ensure (custom) themes have been updated/prepared for 4.0.
* ⚠️ Ensure legacy ZGW URLs have been migrated if you use the Objects API or ZGW APIs
   registration plugins.

Breaking changes
----------------

> See the `4.0 upgrade notes <https://open-forms.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/upgrade-400.html>`_

Reviewer 2: You can use the `ref` directive like on L38

for details.

* [:backend:`6164`] Removed deprecated code (please review the instructions in the documentation
  under **Installation** > **Upgrade details to Open Forms 4.0.0** for all the necessary details):

  - Removed deprecated Camunda registration backend.

>   - Removed legacy OIDC callback endpoints for DigiD, eHerkenning and Organization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Removed legacy OIDC callback endpoints for DigiD, eHerkenning and Organization login.
```

>   - Removed option to the use old Formiojs form renderer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Removed option to use old Formiojs form renderer.
```

>   - Removed option to the use old Formiojs form renderer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Removed the option to use the old formio.js-based form renderer.
```

  - Removed JCC SOAP appointment plugin.
  - Removed Elastic APM support.
  - Changed default ZGW APIs public reference generation from case numbers to Open Forms-generated
    references.
  - Removed unused ``authentication_success`` signal.
  - Marked the v2 cosign ``cosign_date`` property as required.
  - Removed UMD bundle support.
  - Removed Formio translations endpoint.
  - Removed fallback css variables for ``backtotop-link`` component.
  - Dropped support for Haal Centraal BRP Personen bevragen 1.3.
  - Removed the legacy logic evaluation.
  - [:backend:`6311`] Removed Ogone-legacy payment plugin.

>   - Removing legacy detection and fix scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Removed legacy detection and fix scripts.
```

  - [:backend:`6294`] The branch number from an eHerkenning login is now favored over the data from

>     a form field if both are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    a form field when both are available.
```

  - [:backend:`4939`] Removed legacy ``zaaktype`` and ``documenttype`` URL-based configuration
    options for the Objects API and ZGW APIs registration plugins.
  - [:backend:`5769`] The plugin interfaces for extensions are now private API and no longer
    subject to our semantic versioning policy.
  - Removed the ``PERSIST_USER_DEFINED_VARIABLES_UPON_STEP_COMPLETION`` feature flag.

* [:backend:`6275`] Changed the behaviour of "clear-on-hide" in logic evaluation - values cleared
  because the component is hidden are now completely absent from the logic evaluation context.
  Before, they would get the component default or empty value for logic evaluation.
* [:backend:`6182`] Moved the position of validation errors and field descriptions to
  be between the label and input field for improved accessibility. The markup and CSS
  involved have been updated to make this possible, which may affect custom themes.

Major features
--------------

**💬 Single step forms**

In compliance with
`WMEBV (Wet Modernisering Elektronisch Bestuurlijk Verkeer) <https://vng.nl/wmebv>`_, we have
implemented single step forms. These allow citizen to fill out and submit forms, without having to

> authenticate or go through start and confirmation pages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make it easier for citizens and companies to digitally contact government organisations, you can
now create "single step" forms. This simpler kind of form never requires users to authenticate and allows
them to immediately start filling out the form fields without having to start the form submission first.

Embedding single step forms in your CMS pages can make it even easier to comply with the `WMEBV (Wet Modernisering Elektronisch Bestuurlijk Verkeer) <https://vng.nl/wmebv>`_.
```

**♿️ Updated form field layout**

The layout of form fields has been updated so that field descriptions and validation errors are now
displayed between field label and field input, rather than after the field input.

This has been a long-standing request for Open Forms, and aligns the UI and UX with NL Design

> System recommendations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This has been a long-standing request for Open Forms, and aligns the UI and UX with NL Design
System recommendations, as it vastly improves digital accessibility and user experience.
```

**ℹ️ Help function**

We've added a help function to provide users assistance while they fill out a form.

When configured, a "help" callout page is presented before a form is started, explaining the
available assistance function. On each form step a "help" button is added, which (when clicked)
displays the configured help instructions.

**🏗️ Form designer**

We've have replaced the Formio form designer with our own implementation. This allowed us to solve

> a couple UI related issues, and remove and update dependencies with known vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**🏗️ Form designer**

We've have replaced the Formio form designer with our own implementation. This allowed us to solve
a couple UI related issues, and remove and update dependencies with known vulnerabilities.

It also means that we now have full control about future features, wishes and improvements without
needing external changes first.
```

New features
------------

* [:backend:`5932`] Added 'use email for confirmation' option to the ``customerProfile``

>   component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`5932`] Added 'use email for confirmation email' option to the ``customerProfile``
  component.
```

* [:backend:`5764`] Single step forms:

  - Introduced single-step forms which don't have a login/start screen. You can
    immediately fill out the form and submit it.
  - [:backend:`6098`] Replaced the form attribute ``is_appointment`` with the attribute
    ``type``. The ``type`` attribute allows you to choose from a couple options:
    ``Regular`` (the default), ``Appointment`` and ``Single step``.

>   - [:backend:`6106`] Update the form designer UI for the new ``Single step`` form type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [:backend:`6106`] Updated the form designer UI for the new ``Single step`` form type.
```

  - [:backend:`6211`] You can now filter forms based on their type.
  - [:backend:`6350`] Added option to hide the form title.
  - [:backend:`6398`] Added the ``form_url`` static variable, containing metadata about where a
    form submission was started.
  - [:backend:`6399`] Single step forms can now change variable values and evaluate DMN using logic
    actions.

> * [:backend:`6269`] Updated the ``file`` component registration configuration to allow

Reviewer 2: this specific thing is actually gone in 4.0, but it was developed in the 4.0 process to be able to move it. You can omit this entry entirely.

Author: Ahh yeah ofcourse 👍

>   specifing the catalogue domain and RSIN and the description of the document type to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  specifying the catalogue domain and RSIN and the description of the document type to
```

Author: This entry was removed due to another review comment

  use, instead of being limited to direct ``informatieobjecttype`` URL references.
* Added some workarounds for StUF-ZDS when using Onegov zaaksysteem:

  - [:backend:`6230`] Expose the submission ``completed_on`` timestamp as registration
    variable.
  - [:backend:`5951`] Support adding ``extraElementen`` mappings at the initatior level.
  - [:backend:`6242`] Added option to comma-separate serialize ``extraElement`` values
    for array-type data.

* [:backend:`5959`] Added support for ``variables`` on the v3 form API endpoint.
* Various ZGW APIs registration plugin changes:

  - [:backend:`5676`] Added ``Case description`` and ``Case explanation`` configuration
    fields to the ZGW APIs registration plugin.
  - [:backend:`6262`] Added migration tool for legacy ZGW API's URLs (document types, case

>     types).

Reviewer 2: This entry should be removed, the migration needs to be done on 3.5

>   - [:backend:`4939`] Added upgrade check for legacy ZGW API's URLs usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [:backend:`4939`] Added upgrade check for legacy ZGW APIs URLs usage.
```

  - [:backend:`6217`] In the ZGW APIS registration, you can now add a JSON-document with the

>     submission details to the case and select which file formats to relate (JSON, PDF).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [:backend:`6217`] In the ZGW APIs registration, you can now add a JSON-document with the
    submission details to the case and select which file formats to relate (JSON and/or PDF).
```

>   - [:backend:`5984`] Added ``contactpersoonRol`` attributes when creating rol objects through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [:backend:`5984`] Added ``contactpersoonRol`` attribute when creating rol objects through
```

?

    the ZGW APIs registration plugin.
  - [:backend:`6343`] You can now add 'overige' case objects in the ZGW APIs registration plugin.

* [:backend:`6274`] Added script for breaking changes in clear-on-hide impact detection.

> * [:backend:`6391`] You can now easily convert simple logic rules to advanced logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`6391`] Added a button to convert simple logic rules to advanced logic.
```

* [:backend:`6351`] The available component types in the form designer are now updated when the

>   form type is changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`6351`] The available component types in the form builder are now updated when the
  form type is changed.
```

* form builder: the component list/menu + drop zone(s) + edit modal
* form designer: the complete form change/add page, including form details, registration, variables...

* [:backend:`6281`] You can now specify the document registration options for file upload
  components tailored to each registration backend defined on the form:

>   - Added registration configuration for Objects API and ZGW API's plugins on the file component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Added registration configuration for Objects API and ZGW APIs plugins on the file component
```

    variable configuration.
  - Removed the registration tab from the file component configuration.
  - Added migration to automatically move the file component level registration configuration to
    its respective variable registration configuration.
  - Added documentation about using the new file component variable registration configuration.

* [:backend:`6336`] Added address registration attribute for ``addressNL`` components when using
  StUF-ZDS and ZGW APIs registration backends.

> * Implemented various import converters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Added some import converters for legacy form exports:
```

  - [:backend:`6281`] Implemented import converters for file registration options.
  - Added data migration and import converters for fixing invalid ``date`` and ``datetime``
    component min/max date configuration.

>   - [:backend:`6349`] Added import convertion for appointment forms to the new form type mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [:backend:`6349`] Added import conversion for appointment forms to the new form type mechanism.
```

* [:backend:`6380`] The ``substr`` JSON logic operator is now available in logic rules.
* [:backend:`5377`] Exposed a lot of additional Haal Centraal BRP Personen bevragen prefill

>   attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`5377`] Most "Haal Centraal BRP Personen bevragen" attributes are now available for prefill.
```

* [:formio-builder:`265`, :backend:`5714`] Replaced the Formiojs builder with our own
  implementation, allowing us to remove and update dependencies with known vulnerabilities.
* [:backend:`6453`] The pre-requests hook (used in token exchange extension) is now

>   called in the ``partners`` and ``children`` family members.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`6453`] The pre-requests hook (used in token exchange extension) is now
  called in the ``partners`` and ``children`` family members components.
```

* [:backend:`5787`] Added a help function for users needing assistance while filling out
  a form:

  - [:backend:`6317`] You can now globally configure content for the callout page at the
    start that explains the help function, with an optional image.
  - [:backend:`6318`] You can now configure help instructions and an optional image in
    each form. Additionally, you can control when the help callout page is displayed.

* [:backend:`6315`] You can now provide "FAQ Items/additional tooltips" on form
  components to provide more context to users filling out forms.
* [:backend:`6470`] Improved the wording for the domain allowlist configuration description.
* [:backend:`5913`] Added support for external Consent Management Platforms instead of
  the built-in cookie consent machinery.
* [:backend:`5958`] The internal v3 form API endpoint now supports ``logic_rules``.

> * Added telemetry logging for the submission export feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Added telemetry/logging for the submission export feature.
```

* [:backend:`6575`] Added data migration for fixing invalid ``time`` component min/max time
  configuration.

Bugfixes
--------

* [:backend:`6574`] Fixed crash when deleting ``editgrid``, ``fieldset`` or ``columns`` components

>   from a form step.

Reviewer 2: This was not an issue in 3.5 - it only started happening in 4.0.0-beta.0 so I would just omit it from the changelog as it's mostly noise.

* [:backend:`6581`] Fixed ``addressNL`` component incorrectly being treated as required.

> * [:backend:`6497`] Fixed pre-registration failures not being reported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`6497`] Fixed pre-registration failures not being reported in the email digest.
```
Maybe?

* [:backend:`6235`] Fixed client-side Sentry error monitoring not being activated any

>   longer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [:backend:`6235`] Fixed client-side Sentry error monitoring not being activated.
```

  operator was used in client-side evaluated logic.
* Fixed V3 form API endpoint automatically changing the form configuration from
  ``camelCase`` to ``snake_case``.
* [:backend:`5629`] Fixed invalid component prefill configuration producing a vague,
  generic error - you now get proper validation errors.
* Re-introduced the ``DISABLE_2FA`` environment variable.
* [:backend:`6254`] Fixed pre-3.5 imports of forms that contain logic rules with
  "trigger from step" options.
* [:backend:`6155`] Fixed missing registry hooks for ``customerProfile`` component.
* [:backend:`6113`, :backend:`5730`] Fixed broken table markup on introduction page
  and/or start page.
* [Sentry#482931] Fixed type error when session data contains ``None``.
* [:backend:`6459`] Fixed templating usage in ``radio``, ``select`` and ``selectboxes`` components.
* Fixed hooks being called conditionally in the frontend.
* [:backend:`6346`] Fixed a crash in the admin when navigating to nonexistent objects that
  normally have protected upload fields.
* [:backend:`6389`] Fixed the form theme not being applied to cosign and form suspension
  emails.

> * [:backend:`6254`] Fixed pre-3.5 imports of forms that contain logic rules with

Reviewer: Duplicate, it is mentioned in https://github.com/open-formulieren/open-forms/pull/6603/changes#diff-2c623f3c6a917be56c59d43279244996836262cb1e12d9d0786c9c49eef6b43cR248

* [:backend:`6125`] Fixed incorrect empty value definition for ``addressNL`` components.
* Fixed missing custom error message information for ``addressNL`` components.
* [:backend:`6111`] Fixed a browser window crash/freeze when editing the name of a (new)
  form step.
* [:backend:`6302`] Fixed missing logo in the confirmation PDF.
* [:backend:`6320`] Fixed missing component translations when the form does not require
  backend logic.
* [:backend:`6171`] Fixed missing required XML-attributes in StUF-ZDS messages.
* [:backend:`6148`] Fixed crash in JSON schema generation when there's a fieldset inside
  an editgrid.
* [:backend:`6139`] Fixed wrong entity type in StUF-ZDS element for the cosigner details.
* [:backend:`6199`] Fixed crash in outgoing requests when outgoing request logging is
  enabled for responses that are GZIP-compressed and/or use chunked transfer encoding.
* [:backend:`6181`] Fixed ``conditional.eq`` comparison with file component.
* [:backend:`6181`, :backend:`5134`] Fixed simple conditionals ("frontend logic")
  comparison not interpreting "empty" file upload fields correctly. This patch is a
  workaround for a more complex structural fix.

> * Fixed missing structlog context propagation across threads, causing prefill (audit)

Reviewer: Duplicate of https://github.com/open-formulieren/open-forms/pull/6603/changes#diff-2c623f3c6a917be56c59d43279244996836262cb1e12d9d0786c9c49eef6b43cR266-R267

  steps.
* [:backend:`6057`] Fixed missing configuration that caused ``application/hal+json``
  responses not to be saved to the outgoing request logs.
* [:backend:`6091`] Fixed Objects API and ZGW APIs registration backends using the
  form's internal name for related documents like the confirmation PDF.
* [:backend:`4699`] Fixed ``addressNL`` not using custom error messages for the
  city/postcode during validation.
* Fixed a crash in logic rules when it contains a property action that refers to a
  non-existing component.
* Fixed private form step fields being publicly available.
* Fixed form logic check scripts.
* [:backend:`6289`] Fixed crash when extracting variables used in template expressions
  in ``else`` blocks in form definitions.
* [:backend:`6286`] Fixed template variables not being extracted from the component
  properties.

Project maintenance
-------------------

* Dropped a bunch of frontend legacy peer dependencies.
* Dropped microscope-sass frontend dependency.
* Updated test tooling:

  - Haal Centraal test tooling, improving the DX.
  - Objecttypes/objects API test tooling to use Open Object.
  - Bumped Open Zaak version in test tooling from 1.13 to 1.29.

> * Updated upgrade check to require version 3.5.4 before upgrading to 4.0.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Updated upgrade check to require version 3.5.5 before upgrading to 4.0.0.
```
will be bumped up a notch :)
